okay so i want to do one about crises in
general and ways in which governments
can handle crises because i think
a misunderstanding of what's happening
here is
potentially going to really damage us
okay
so
i'm going to use some of the
information which we've taught in
previous videos right first from what is
wealth the knowledge that there's a huge
amount of wealth in society for example
these buildings around us
but it's very unequally honored
secondly
when we spoke about why rich people get
richer
we mention the fact that there's cash
flows between
the rich and the rest of us and the rest
of us and the rich
but the cash which transfers from
ordinary people to the rich is generally
either things you
have to buy or literally things you're
legally mandated to pay so your rent
your mortgage when you buy food when you
buy energy these go to the owners of the
properties the owners of the mortgages
the owners of the land the owners of the
energy and energy production facilities
these are all rich people okay so
ordinary people
have to pay money to the rich every day
every week every month every year
rich people give money back by basically
large discretionary spending that's how
it goes around the problem we have here
there's a structural
imbalance which is that ordinary people
have to make those payments and rich
people they can stop you know spending a
ton of money whenever they want right
these are like this is just the money
they spend to live a life of luxury and
they don't have to spend that right
and um
most of our recent crises like covered
in 2020
like 2008 financial crisis
if you go back to the great depression
early last year
these kinds of crises that actually come
about because people suddenly stop
spending money
and the problem with this is these are
crises but they're crises which
financially benefit the rich
because if rich people stop spending
their money
ordinary people still have to keep
giving them their money so it means cash
accumulation these are basically crises
of inequality and you can summarize them
by saying you know if rich people stop
spending ordinary people stop eating you
know what i mean because the rich people
own the food and they own the houses and
they own the transport and the energy
right so if rich people stop spending
ordinary people then have nothing to pay
the rich people for
housing energy food transportation
basically essentials right
so
when this happens when you have these
sort of crisis of inequality
like 2008 like covered
you need well what we're going to talk
about is the four different ways which
you can manage this kind of crisis okay
the first thing to recognize is the pain
will by default fall onto ordinary
people now if you consider for example
kovid if there was no support in kovid
well rich people would still be able to
eat you know they'd have to worry about
paying rent they'd have to worry about
paying the mortgage because they own
those things
and they would still be receiving rent
mortgage income it would have been
ordinary people who can't afford to pay
the rent to pay their mortgage okay so
in the absence of any action from the
government
what you literally get is ordinary
people becoming homeless ordinary people
starving
that's generally what happens right and
ordinary people not being able to apply
heating and we're starting to see these
kinds of things happening now right
which is the pain naturally falls on
ordinary people and of course the
poorest hurt the most so number one is
basically ordinary people suffer they
starve they become homeless you know
that's number one way to deal with the
crisis a crisis of inequality
number two is you tax people
and when you tax people there's a
question of who do you tax okay
um one thing you can do is you tax the
middle class and if you tax the middle
class then you can keep ordinary people
in their homes and you can keep food
getting towards new people but you
squeeze the middle class and you make
life harder and harder for your middle
class you know people who are not poor
but they don't have too much you know
what i mean that's one option the third
option and the option which i'm
continually advocating for is he tax the
rich attacks the rich i mean during
crisis of inequality rich people tend to
get much much much richer 2008 showed
that
covert showed that
i think when you have a crisis of
inequality where richard when you have a
crisis where rich people are getting
richer the obviously correct thing to do
is to talk to rich people the problem
with this is rich people are very
powerful their own newspapers their own
think tanks they have a lot of influence
they you know our chancellor is a member
of a billionaire family you know
they fund the main political parties and
they're going to push back against this
right so
you have three options number one is you
literally let ordering poor people
starve okay i think we would all agree
this is something we'd rather not do but
it's worth pointing out that's something
we are doing right now okay number two
is you tax the middle class
then probably better than letting poor
people starve but increasingly the
middle class being squeezed and
squeezing squeeze and what you're seeing
now is it's not just the poor who are
suffering a lot of people in the middle
are really getting hurt as well and
this again is something we are doing
because national insurance which is
largely attacked on the middle class has
been raised okay so the government is
allowing poor people to start to starve
to an extent and it is taxing middle
class people hasn't raised taxes at all
on the rich okay
these are the three main ways you deal
with it you let people suffer you tax
the middle class you tax the rich
there's one other way right which is you
print money and this is something which
has been used massively massively
massively in this crisis the printing of
money okay and
printing of money seems like
a really attractive option right when
you look at those other three options
right letting people starve
very unattractive tax in the middle
class are already struggling very
unattractive and not popular politically
because this is a lot of people
taxing the rich well this is like
literally
the rich it seems effectively on the
government and the newspaper so this is
exactly what they don't want to do
and then you have this other thing well
there's a print money we don't tax
anybody
fantastic right and this is actually the
number one thing which you've chosen in
this crisis is the printing of money and
um
the point i want to really make here is
when you use printing money as your
option
somebody loses
that money is not like resources if you
make more resources and you give them to
one group they're richer everyone else
is fine but money
is
by its nature a relative resource you
know because money is something used to
buy real resources and if somebody else
gets a load more money then they will
get a bigger share of the real resources
which means you will get less
so when money printing is used as a
solution
it's very very important that you
understand who gets the money and if you
are not the group that gets the money
it's important to understand that
effectively it's the same as taxing you
but you don't see it as a tax you will
see it as inflation
so this is what is happening now
is exactly what you would expect to
happen if you deal with the crisis by
printing money and that money goes to
the rich which is the rich will get
richer all the prices will go up
ordinary people get poorer and they will
see that increased poverty coming
through inflation
you see what i'm saying like if you
what i want ordinary people to
understand that printed money being
given to the rich is the same as taxing
you it's the same as taxing you but
rather than seeing the pain as the tax
coming out of your payment of your pay
packet you will see the pain as prices
going up in the shops and those prices
going up in the shops that is the
manifestation of rich people being
richer
so
what i want people to understand is we
do not have two separate crisis here we
don't have one crisis of the rich
getting richer and another crisis of
inflation appalling living standards
the inflation and falling living
standards is the rich getting richer
because the rich are getting richer
right printed money and when the rich
get richer i printed money you get hurt
by inflation
so
to summarize
when there is a crisis of inequality
which the way to identify a crisis of
inequalities either it's getting richer
you know if there's an earthquake the
rich don't get richer you know what i
mean but in covid and in 2008 the rich
got richer which which is a good sign if
the poor are getting poor and the rich
getting richer it's a good sign that
it's crisis inequality right
when you see that happening there are
four ways to deal with it one you do
nothing which is literally letting
people become homeless then people start
two you tax the middle class which by
the way is not what i'm advocating for
three you tax the rich which 100 is what
i'm advocating for or for you print
money
and it's important to realize that if
the printing money option is the option
chosen
you need to know am i the group that got
the money or the group that didn't and
in this country you know unless you're
in the top ten percent you wouldn't i
didn't get the money
the rich got the money it was a huge
amount of money that is equivalent to
taxing you and you will see that pain by
inflation so the pain you are suffering
now if you are an ordinary person or a
poorer person in this country
is the manifestation of the government
choosing
rather than to tax the rich
to print money and allow the roots to
get richer and that pain is inevitable
unless we take that third option which i
think we should all agree is the right
option but for some reason our
billionaire chancellor and his
multi-millionaire mates don't want to
choose
if we don't take that third option this
pain doesn't get better
that's the key so it's supposed to be an
educational video explaining crisis of
inequality explaining that printing
money
will make the rich richer and we'll make
you poorer and the inflation
is not separate from the increase
inequality it is caused by the increased
inequality and the only way to get
through a crisis like this without
making living standards worse for
ordinary people is to tax
thank you for coming to my ted talk
yeah we're good yeah
so it's intentionally designed national
insurance so that very rich people pay a
very low percent th
there is one other thing they can do
with that mass amount of income
they can buy your mom's house
[Music]